Public water systems serve over 300 million Americans (approximately 90% of American) daily through approximately 148,000 regulated systems. 
Water testing in the USA is regulated by the Safe Drinking Water Act, which regulates all public water systems in the USA and sets standards for drinking water testing for more than 90 contaminants. The USA has one of the safest public drinking water systems in the world. ALmost all citizens in the USA using public drinking water systems recieve water that meets or exceeds EPA standards. Large cities test waters at least daily if not hundreds of times per month to ensure high levels of water quality, New York for example, test their water 600,000 times per year. However, in life challenges exist. From aging infrastrucuture to newly discovered potential toxins there's a constant battle between the water experts and the public water systems to keep drinking water safe, and in the rare event a problem occurs with drinking water the consequences are usually severe. This paper will explore some of these existing and emerging challenges.

Safe drinking water is critical to public health. In the USA around 90% of people rely on public drinking water, which, to ensure this water is safe, must be monitored constantly and frequently as even one polluting incident has the potential to affect millions of people. The main source of drinking water regulation is derived from the Safe Drinking Water Act enacted by federal congress in 1974 which has been updated over the decades to improve testing and reporting requirements. This act doesn't define specific contaminants to be regulated directly, but gives the EPA the broad authority to define contaminates to be regulated in drinking water. As of 2025, there are over 90 contaminates on the EPA regulation list. The EPA maintains another list called the contaminate candidate list(CCL) of contaminants that are unregulated but are considered potentially toxic to humans in some way and warrant further study to potentially be promoted to the full regulation list. It gather's the CCL from various sources including scientific literature, public nominations, additional federal agencies, university data, current data from drinking water systems, and more. The EPA then further studies these toxins prevalence and toxicity. By law the EPA operates on 5 year cycle in which it will make determinations, and release a new/updated CCL. Some notable examples: in 2021 the PFAS toxin was moved from the CCL to the full regulation list and in 2019 microplastics were brought up as a contaiminate of concern warranting more study for inclusion on the CCL.



One of the biggest challenges to drinking water safety nationally is aging water distribution and treatment infrastructure. The USA has more than 2 million miles of pipes many of which were installed more than 50 years ago, with approximately 6 to 10 million miles of distribution pipes still containing lead. Also, due to the age of these pipes there are many water system breaks, causing loss of millions of gallons of water nationally, opening up the potential for microbial contamination, and causing regional 'boil water advisories'.  Also, many of the water treatment facilities date back to the mid-20th century which potentially do not have the technology to adapt to and remove newly emerging toxins like microplastics or PFAS. Many of the bigger cities like Chicago, New York, and Cleveland have some of the greatest amounts of old pipes that need to be replaced, however the highest number of SDWA violations typically occur in less populated regions with less budget to support replacing aging infrastructure and more newer advanced testing.  

One of the newer contaminants to emerge as a contaminant in the water supply is a class of chemicals known as PFAS which stands for “per and polyfluoroalkyl substances.” PFAS are comprised of a wide variety of molecules with different physical and chemical properties and molecular weights with perfluoroalkyl moieties as common structural features. The exact definition is somewhat unclear as there's thousands of molecules considered in the PFAS classification and the boundaries are somewhat grey.  The essential idea behind PFAS is the fact they are flourinated carbon alkanes with a structure consisting of a carbon backbone that is fully saturated with Flourine and either no or some other functional groups.





